README.md, before:

# Component Analytics

Measures React component usage for a UI component library. Uses [React Scanner](https://github.com/moroshko/react-scanner) and custom AST-based analyzers to produce actionable reports on component usage, HTML tag prevalence, customization patterns, prop surface area, and line ownership across configurable codebases.

All settings — which codebases to scan, which UI libraries to measure, and which components to track — are controlled by a single configuration file: **`component-analytics.config.js`**.

## Quick Start

```bash
npm install

# 1. Edit the config file to match your project
#    (codebases, UI libraries, components to track)
vi component-analytics.config.js

# 2. Run every analysis
npm run analyze

# Or run a single step
npm run analyze:scan             # React Scanner (components + ui-wrappers)
npm run analyze:sources          # Tracked UI library vs internal vs HTML
npm run analyze:html-tags        # Raw HTML tag usage per codebase
npm run analyze:customizations   # Inline styles & styled() on tracked components
npm run analyze:per-component    # Per-component imports, instances, props, defaults
npm run analyze:prop-surface     # Character footprint of UI props
npm run analyze:line-ownership   # Line-of-code footprint of UI library
```

The runner reads codebases and UI libraries from `component-analytics.config.js` automatically — no hardcoded codebase names in any script.

## Configuration

All project settings live in a single file at the project root:

```
component-analytics.config.js
```

Edit this file to control **what** gets analysed. Every analysis script reads from it automatically.

### Codebases

Define which codebases to scan. Each entry has a `name` (used in reports) and a `path` (relative to the project root):

```js
codebases: [
  { name: "my-app",    path: "./codebases/my-app" },
  { name: "my-design", path: "./codebases/my-design-system" },
],
```

To add or remove a codebase, edit this array and re-run `npm run analyze`. No other files need to change.

### UI Libraries

Define one or more UI component libraries whose usage you want to measure. Each entry specifies import sources and component names:

```js
uiLibraries: [
  {
    name: "My UI Library",
    importSources: ["@my-org/ui"],
    excludeSources: ["@my-org/ui/theme"],
    components: ["Box", "Button", "Card", "Flex", "Text", /* … */],
  },
  {
    name: "My Icons",
    importSources: ["@my-org/icons"],
    excludeSources: [],
    components: ["AddIcon", "CloseIcon", "EditIcon", /* … */],
  },
],
```

Components from all entries are merged into a single tracked set. All libraries' import sources are matched together when classifying JSX elements.

| Field | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `importSources` | Package names matched as substrings against import paths |
| `excludeSources` | Import paths to ignore even if they match an `importSource` |
| `components` | PascalCase component names to track |

Prop defaults are detected automatically from usage data during `npm run analyze` — no manual configuration needed.

### File Scanning

Control which files are included in every analysis:

```js
files: {
  pattern: "**/*.{tsx,jsx}",
  ignore: [
    "**/node_modules/**",
    "**/dist/**",
    "**/*.test.*",
    "**/__tests__/**",
    "**/*.stories.*",
  ],
},
```

### Other UI Libraries

The sources report classifies imports into categories. Third-party UI libraries (not the tracked one, not internal code) are identified by these substrings:

```js
otherUIPatterns: [
  "@radix-ui",
  "@chakra-ui",
  "styled-components",
  "motion/react",
],
```

### Prop Combinations

Cross-tabulate prop value combinations on specific components to see which pairings actually occur in practice. Each entry names a tracked component and two or more props to combine:

```js
propCombos: [
  { component: "Text", props: ["weight", "size"] },
  { component: "Button", props: ["tone", "mode"] },
  { component: "Card", props: ["tone", "padding", "radius"] },
  { component: "Heading", props: ["size", "as"] },
],
```

| Field | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `component` | A PascalCase component name from one of your `uiLibraries` entries |
| `props` | Two or more prop names whose value tuples will be counted |

The report counts every unique combination of values across all codebases. Instances where none of the listed props are set are excluded. Run with:

```
npm run analyze:prop-combos
```

## Reports

All reports are written to the `reports/` directory. The structure is designed to be self-explanatory:

```
reports/
├── {codebase}/                     # Per-codebase React Scanner output
│   ├── all-components/             #   Every React component (no import filter)
│   │   ├── all-components.json     #     Raw React Scanner JSON
│   │   ├── summary.csv             #     Component name, instance count, top prop
│   │   ├── detailed.csv            #     Every component × prop × value
│   │   └── stats.md                #     Human-readable statistics
│   └── wrappers/                   #   Only internal UI wrapper components
│       ├── wrappers.json           #     Raw React Scanner JSON
│       ├── summary.csv             #     Wrapper component summary
│       ├── detailed.csv            #     Wrapper component × prop × value
│       └── stats.md                #     Human-readable statistics
│
├── components/                     # Tracked UI library — per-component detail
│   ├── summary.md                  #   Ranked table of all tracked components
│   ├── summary.csv                 #   One row per component (instances, imports, props)
│   ├── summary.json                #   Machine-readable summary
│   ├── detected-defaults.md        #   Auto-detected default prop values with evidence
│   ├── detected-defaults.json      #   Machine-readable detected defaults
│   └── detail/                     #   One JSON per component
│       ├── Button.json             #     Imports, instances, props, values, references
│       ├── Card.json
│       └── …
│
├── sources/                        # JSX element source classification
│   ├── report.md                   #   Which JSX elements come from the tracked library
│   ├── report.csv                  #     vs internal code vs native HTML vs other UI
│   └── report.json
│
├── html-tags/                      # Native HTML/SVG tag usage
│   ├── report.md                   #   Every <div>, <span>, <svg>, etc. in JSX
│   ├── report.csv                  #     categorized by purpose (layout, text, form, …)
│   └── report.json
│
├── customizations/                 # Inline style= and styled() overrides
│   ├── report.md                   #   How often tracked components are customized
│   ├── report.csv                  #     with inline styles or styled-components wrappers
│   └── report.json
│
├── prop-combos/                    # Prop value combination cross-tabulation
│   ├── Text/                       #   One directory per component
│   │   ├── Text-weight-size-combo.md
│   │   ├── Text-weight-size-combo.csv
│   │   └── Text-weight-size-combo.json
│   ├── Button/
│   │   ├── Button-tone-mode-combo.md
│   │   ├── Button-tone-mode-combo.csv
│   │   └── Button-tone-mode-combo.json
│   └── …/                          #   File pattern: <Component>-<prop1>-<prop2>-combo.*
│
├── prop-surface/                   # UI prop character footprint
│   ├── report.md                   #   What percentage of UI-file characters are
│   ├── report.csv                  #     tracked component props/attributes
│   └── report.json
│
└── line-ownership/                 # UI library line ownership
    ├── report.md                   #   What percentage of UI-file lines belong to
    ├── report.csv                  #     tracked library imports and JSX tags
    └── report.json
```

### What each report measures

| Report | Question it answers |
|--------|-------------------|
| **`{codebase}/all-components/`** | What React components exist in this codebase and how often is each used? |
| **`{codebase}/wrappers/`** | Which internal wrapper components (e.g. ui-components/) are used and how? |
| **`components/summary.*`** | Across all codebases, which tracked UI library components are used most? |
| **`components/detail/<Name>.json`** | For one component: every prop, every value, every file+line reference. |
| **`components/detected-defaults.*`** | Which prop values are redundant because they match the component's default? |
| **`sources/report.*`** | What percentage of JSX elements come from the tracked library vs internal code vs raw HTML? |
| **`html-tags/report.*`** | How much raw HTML (`<div>`, `<span>`, etc.) is used instead of tracked UI components? |
| **`customizations/report.*`** | How often are tracked components overridden with `style={}` or `styled()`? |
| **`prop-combos/report.*`** | Which prop value combinations actually occur (e.g. `weight` × `size` on `<Text>`)? Configured via `propCombos` in the config file. |
| **`prop-surface/report.*`** | What fraction of UI-file characters are tracked component props? |
| **`line-ownership/report.*`** | What fraction of UI-file lines are tracked library imports + JSX tags? |

## Project Structure

```
ui-component-analysis/
├── component-analytics.config.js           # ← Single configuration file
├── codebases/                          # Source codebases (git clones)
│   └── <your-codebases>/
├── config/                             # React Scanner config (reads from component-analytics.config.js)
│   └── react-scanner.config.js         #   Unified config; SCAN_TYPE env var selects the mode
├── scripts/                            # Analysis & reporting scripts
│   ├── run.js                          # ← Unified runner (npm run analyze)
│   ├── lib/                            # Shared library
│   │   ├── constants.js                #   Derived from component-analytics.config.js
│   │   ├── utils.js                    #   sortByCount, pct, incr, mergeCounters, compact, …
│   │   └── files.js                    #   findFiles, readSafe, writeReports, ensureDir, …
│   ├── sources/                        # Import source classification
│   │   └── analyze-ui-component-sources.js
│   ├── html-tags/                      # HTML tag usage analysis
│   │   └── analyze-html-tags.js
│   ├── customizations/                 # Inline style & styled() analysis
│   │   └── analyze-sanity-ui-customizations.js
│   ├── per-component/                  # Per-component analysis + default detection
│   │   ├── analyze-per-component.js
│   │   └── detect-prop-defaults.js
│   ├── prop-surface/                   # Character footprint of UI props
│   │   └── analyze-prop-surface.js
│   ├── line-ownership/                 # Line-of-code footprint
│   │   └── analyze-line-ownership.js
│   ├── components/                     # React Scanner post-processing
│   ├── icons/                          # Icon-specific analysis (legacy)
│   ├── ui-components/                  # UI wrapper layer post-processing
│   └── __tests__/                      # Unit tests (570 tests)
│       ├── lib.test.js
│       ├── html-tags.test.js
│       ├── customizations.test.js
│       ├── sources.test.js
│       └── per-component.test.js
├── reports/                            # Generated output (gitignored csvs/txts)
├── package.json
├── jest.config.js
└── README.md
```

## Adding a New Codebase

1. Clone the repo into a directory (e.g. `codebases/my-app/`).
2. Add an entry to the `codebases` array in `component-analytics.config.js`:
   ```js
   { name: "my-app", path: "./codebases/my-app" }
   ```
3. Run `npm run analyze`.

## Tracking a Different UI Library

1. Edit the `uiLibraries` array in `component-analytics.config.js`.
2. Set `importSources` to the package name(s) (e.g. `["@chakra-ui/react"]`).
3. List the component names you want to track in `components`.
4. Run `npm run analyze`.

Prop defaults are detected automatically from the usage data — no manual configuration needed.

## Tools & Dependencies

- **[React Scanner](https://github.com/moroshko/react-scanner)** — component-level usage via static analysis
- **[glob](https://github.com/isaacs/node-glob)** — file discovery
- **[Jest](https://jestjs.io/)** — testing
- **Node.js** — custom AST-pattern scripts for icons, HTML tags, styled analysis, and prop detection

Commit message:

Replace committed config with example file
- Copy component-analytics.config.js to component-analytics.config.example.js
- Add component-analytics.config.js to .gitignore
- Error with hint when config is missing (except in tests)
- Update README with copy step and explanation

README.md, after:

# Component Analytics

Measures React component usage for a UI component library. Uses [React Scanner](https://github.com/moroshko/react-scanner) and custom AST-based analyzers to produce actionable reports on component usage, HTML tag prevalence, customization patterns, prop surface area, and line ownership across configurable codebases.

All settings — which codebases to scan, which UI libraries to measure, and which components to track — are controlled by a single configuration file: **`component-analytics.config.js`**. This file is not committed to the repository — copy the included example to get started.

## Quick Start

```bash
npm install

# 1. Copy the example config and edit it to match your project
cp component-analytics.config.example.js component-analytics.config.js

# 2. Edit the config file
#    (codebases, UI libraries, components to track)
vi component-analytics.config.js

# 3. Run every analysis
npm run analyze

# Or run a single step
npm run analyze:scan             # React Scanner (components + ui-wrappers)
npm run analyze:sources          # Tracked UI library vs internal vs HTML
npm run analyze:html-tags        # Raw HTML tag usage per codebase
npm run analyze:customizations   # Inline styles & styled() on tracked components
npm run analyze:per-component    # Per-component imports, instances, props, defaults
npm run analyze:prop-surface     # Character footprint of UI props
npm run analyze:line-ownership   # Line-of-code footprint of UI library
```

The runner reads codebases and UI libraries from `component-analytics.config.js` automatically — no hardcoded codebase names in any script.

## Configuration

All project settings live in a single file at the project root:

```
component-analytics.config.js
```

This file is **not checked into the repository** — it's `.gitignore`d so each developer/environment can have its own configuration without merge conflicts. An example is provided:

```bash
cp component-analytics.config.example.js component-analytics.config.js
```

Edit the copy to control **what** gets analysed. Every analysis script reads from it automatically. If the config file is missing you'll see an error with instructions when you run any analysis command.

### Codebases

Define which codebases to scan. Each entry has a `name` (used in reports) and a `path` (relative to the project root):

```js
codebases: [
  { name: "my-app",    path: "./codebases/my-app" },
  { name: "my-design", path: "./codebases/my-design-system" },
],
```

To add or remove a codebase, edit this array and re-run `npm run analyze`. No other files need to change.

### UI Libraries

Define one or more UI component libraries whose usage you want to measure. Each entry specifies import sources and component names:

```js
uiLibraries: [
  {
    name: "My UI Library",
    importSources: ["@my-org/ui"],
    excludeSources: ["@my-org/ui/theme"],
    components: ["Box", "Button", "Card", "Flex", "Text", /* … */],
  },
  {
    name: "My Icons",
    importSources: ["@my-org/icons"],
    excludeSources: [],
    components: ["AddIcon", "CloseIcon", "EditIcon", /* … */],
  },
],
```

Components from all entries are merged into a single tracked set. All libraries' import sources are matched together when classifying JSX elements.

| Field | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `importSources` | Package names matched as substrings against import paths |
| `excludeSources` | Import paths to ignore even if they match an `importSource` |
| `components` | PascalCase component names to track |

Prop defaults are detected automatically from usage data during `npm run analyze` — no manual configuration needed.

### File Scanning

Control which files are included in every analysis:

```js
files: {
  pattern: "**/*.{tsx,jsx}",
  ignore: [
    "**/node_modules/**",
    "**/dist/**",
    "**/*.test.*",
    "**/__tests__/**",
    "**/*.stories.*",
  ],
},
```

### Other UI Libraries

The sources report classifies imports into categories. Third-party UI libraries (not the tracked one, not internal code) are identified by these substrings:

```js
otherUIPatterns: [
  "@radix-ui",
  "@chakra-ui",
  "styled-components",
  "motion/react",
],
```

### Prop Combinations

Cross-tabulate prop value combinations on specific components to see which pairings actually occur in practice. Each entry names a tracked component and two or more props to combine:

```js
propCombos: [
  { component: "Text", props: ["weight", "size"] },
  { component: "Button", props: ["tone", "mode"] },
  { component: "Card", props: ["tone", "padding", "radius"] },
  { component: "Heading", props: ["size", "as"] },
],
```

| Field | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `component` | A PascalCase component name from one of your `uiLibraries` entries |
| `props` | Two or more prop names whose value tuples will be counted |

The report counts every unique combination of values across all codebases. Instances where none of the listed props are set are excluded. Run with:

```
npm run analyze:prop-combos
```

## Reports

All reports are written to the `reports/` directory. The structure is designed to be self-explanatory:

```
reports/
├── {codebase}/                     # Per-codebase React Scanner output
│   ├── all-components/             #   Every React component (no import filter)
│   │   ├── all-components.json     #     Raw React Scanner JSON
│   │   ├── summary.csv             #     Component name, instance count, top prop
│   │   ├── detailed.csv            #     Every component × prop × value
│   │   └── stats.md                #     Human-readable statistics
│   └── wrappers/                   #   Only internal UI wrapper components
│       ├── wrappers.json           #     Raw React Scanner JSON
│       ├── summary.csv             #     Wrapper component summary
│       ├── detailed.csv            #     Wrapper component × prop × value
│       └── stats.md                #     Human-readable statistics
│
├── components/                     # Tracked UI library — per-component detail
│   ├── summary.md                  #   Ranked table of all tracked components
│   ├── summary.csv                 #   One row per component (instances, imports, props)
│   ├── summary.json                #   Machine-readable summary
│   ├── detected-defaults.md        #   Auto-detected default prop values with evidence
│   ├── detected-defaults.json      #   Machine-readable detected defaults
│   └── detail/                     #   One JSON per component
│       ├── Button.json             #     Imports, instances, props, values, references
│       ├── Card.json
│       └── …
│
├── sources/                        # JSX element source classification
│   ├── report.md                   #   Which JSX elements come from the tracked library
│   ├── report.csv                  #     vs internal code vs native HTML vs other UI
│   └── report.json
│
├── html-tags/                      # Native HTML/SVG tag usage
│   ├── report.md                   #   Every <div>, <span>, <svg>, etc. in JSX
│   ├── report.csv                  #     categorized by purpose (layout, text, form, …)
│   └── report.json
│
├── customizations/                 # Inline style= and styled() overrides
│   ├── report.md                   #   How often tracked components are customized
│   ├── report.csv                  #     with inline styles or styled-components wrappers
│   └── report.json
│
├── prop-combos/                    # Prop value combination cross-tabulation
│   ├── Text/                       #   One directory per component
│   │   ├── Text-weight-size-combo.md
│   │   ├── Text-weight-size-combo.csv
│   │   └── Text-weight-size-combo.json
│   ├── Button/
│   │   ├── Button-tone-mode-combo.md
│   │   ├── Button-tone-mode-combo.csv
│   │   └── Button-tone-mode-combo.json
│   └── …/                          #   File pattern: <Component>-<prop1>-<prop2>-combo.*
│
├── prop-surface/                   # UI prop character footprint
│   ├── report.md                   #   What percentage of UI-file characters are
│   ├── report.csv                  #     tracked component props/attributes
│   └── report.json
│
└── line-ownership/                 # UI library line ownership
    ├── report.md                   #   What percentage of UI-file lines belong to
    ├── report.csv                  #     tracked library imports and JSX tags
    └── report.json
```

### What each report measures

| Report | Question it answers |
|--------|-------------------|
| **`{codebase}/all-components/`** | What React components exist in this codebase and how often is each used? |
| **`{codebase}/wrappers/`** | Which internal wrapper components (e.g. ui-components/) are used and how? |
| **`components/summary.*`** | Across all codebases, which tracked UI library components are used most? |
| **`components/detail/<Name>.json`** | For one component: every prop, every value, every file+line reference. |
| **`components/detected-defaults.*`** | Which prop values are redundant because they match the component's default? |
| **`sources/report.*`** | What percentage of JSX elements come from the tracked library vs internal code vs raw HTML? |
| **`html-tags/report.*`** | How much raw HTML (`<div>`, `<span>`, etc.) is used instead of tracked UI components? |
| **`customizations/report.*`** | How often are tracked components overridden with `style={}` or `styled()`? |
| **`prop-combos/report.*`** | Which prop value combinations actually occur (e.g. `weight` × `size` on `<Text>`)? Configured via `propCombos` in the config file. |
| **`prop-surface/report.*`** | What fraction of UI-file characters are tracked component props? |
| **`line-ownership/report.*`** | What fraction of UI-file lines are tracked library imports + JSX tags? |

## Project Structure

```
ui-component-analysis/
├── component-analytics.config.js           # ← Single configuration file
├── codebases/                          # Source codebases (git clones)
│   └── <your-codebases>/
├── config/                             # React Scanner config (reads from component-analytics.config.js)
│   └── react-scanner.config.js         #   Unified config; SCAN_TYPE env var selects the mode
├── scripts/                            # Analysis & reporting scripts
│   ├── run.js                          # ← Unified runner (npm run analyze)
│   ├── lib/                            # Shared library
│   │   ├── constants.js                #   Derived from component-analytics.config.js
│   │   ├── utils.js                    #   sortByCount, pct, incr, mergeCounters, compact, …
│   │   └── files.js                    #   findFiles, readSafe, writeReports, ensureDir, …
│   ├── sources/                        # Import source classification
│   │   └── analyze-ui-component-sources.js
│   ├── html-tags/                      # HTML tag usage analysis
│   │   └── analyze-html-tags.js
│   ├── customizations/                 # Inline style & styled() analysis
│   │   └── analyze-sanity-ui-customizations.js
│   ├── per-component/                  # Per-component analysis + default detection
│   │   ├── analyze-per-component.js
│   │   └── detect-prop-defaults.js
│   ├── prop-surface/                   # Character footprint of UI props
│   │   └── analyze-prop-surface.js
│   ├── line-ownership/                 # Line-of-code footprint
│   │   └── analyze-line-ownership.js
│   ├── components/                     # React Scanner post-processing
│   ├── icons/                          # Icon-specific analysis (legacy)
│   ├── ui-components/                  # UI wrapper layer post-processing
│   └── __tests__/                      # Unit tests (570 tests)
│       ├── lib.test.js
│       ├── html-tags.test.js
│       ├── customizations.test.js
│       ├── sources.test.js
│       └── per-component.test.js
├── reports/                            # Generated output (gitignored csvs/txts)
├── package.json
├── jest.config.js
└── README.md
```

## Adding a New Codebase

1. Clone the repo into a directory (e.g. `codebases/my-app/`).
2. Add an entry to the `codebases` array in `component-analytics.config.js`:
   ```js
   { name: "my-app", path: "./codebases/my-app" }
   ```
3. Run `npm run analyze`.

## Tracking a Different UI Library

1. Edit the `uiLibraries` array in `component-analytics.config.js`.
2. Set `importSources` to the package name(s) (e.g. `["@chakra-ui/react"]`).
3. List the component names you want to track in `components`.
4. Run `npm run analyze`.

Prop defaults are detected automatically from the usage data — no manual configuration needed.

## Tools & Dependencies

- **[React Scanner](https://github.com/moroshko/react-scanner)** — component-level usage via static analysis
- **[glob](https://github.com/isaacs/node-glob)** — file discovery
- **[Jest](https://jestjs.io/)** — testing
- **Node.js** — custom AST-pattern scripts for icons, HTML tags, styled analysis, and prop detection
